PocketIC Docs page (#2225)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/setup/pocket-ic.md

# Testing canisters with PocketIC

## Overview

> PocketIC is a lightweight, deterministic testing platform for programmatic testing for canisters written in Rust and Python. It seamlessly integrates with existing testing infrastructure, such as `cargo test`, and runs as a standalone binary that doesn't require additional containers or virtual machines. Currently, PocketIC is supported on MacOS and Linux host systems. 

Reviewer: Just a suggestion, but I think "for programmatic testing for canisters written in Rust and Python" would sound a bit better as "for programmatically testing canisters written in Rust and Python".

On an unrelated note, there is also TypeScript support via [PicJS](https://github.com/hadronous/pic-js). I'd be happy to contribute an additional section to cover that.

> PocketIC is a lightweight, deterministic testing platform for programmatic testing for canisters written in Rust and Python. It seamlessly integrates with existing testing infrastructure, such as `cargo test`, and runs as a standalone binary that doesn't require additional containers or virtual machines. Currently, PocketIC is supported on MacOS and Linux host systems. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PocketIC is a lightweight, deterministic testing solution for programmatic testing of canisters.
It seamlessly integrates with existing testing infrastructure, such as `cargo test`, and runs as a standalone binary that doesn't require additional containers or virtual machines.
Currently, PocketIC is supported on macOS and Linux host systems. 
```

While there are other options for testing canisters, they may come with pitfalls such as:

- Installing and testing canisters on the mainnet provides the 'real' workflow experience, but will cost developers real cycles.

> - Testing using the local replica provided by `dfx` allows for testing on a single IC node, but there is no cross-net or multi-subnet functionality. Testing with the local replica is not deterministic, and it is rather heavyweight.

Reviewer: I would say additionally from my experience writing automated tests with DFX that it is complex, _slow_, requires quite a bit of boilerplate code to get it working, you have little control over the testing environment and it can interfere with your local testing environment if you don't automate it correctly.

PocketIC is designed to remedy these pitfalls, resulting in a testing environment that provides the following benefits:

> - Deterministic: Synchronous control over the local execution environment.

Reviewer: Since it exposes a REST API, interacting with PocketIC in a synchronous manner will entirely depend on the language that's used to write the test. Maybe here is the right place to mention that PocketIC removes non-deterministic parts of the replica to make tests fully reproducible.

> - Lightweight: Only provides the necessary components, such as the consensus and networking layers.

Reviewer: This is not entirely correct, PocketIC _removes_ the consensus and networking layers. Maybe @fxgst can comment on the correct phrasing here.

> - Concurrent and independent IC instances: Enabled by default, making sharing possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Concurrent and independent IC instances: Enabling tests to run in parallel
```

- Multi-language support: Currently supports Rust and Python, but supports integration with any language that is written against the PocketIC REST-API. 

> - Versatile: Runs as a service on the test system and accepts HTTP/JSON. 

Reviewer: I think the versatility comes from having more fine-grained control over the canister. Being able to set stable memory, control how time passes etc.

- Support for Xnet calls and multiple subnets. 

:::caution

> While PocketIC supports integration with any language, currently Rust and Python are supported and will be covered in this guide.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While PocketIC can support integration with any language, Rust and Python will be covered in this guide.
```

:::

## PocketIC Rust

To use PocketIC, the latest PocketIC server binary must be downloaded from the PocketIC repo. You can download the latest version for MacOS or Linux systems [here](https://github.com/dfinity/pocketic#download-the-pocketic-server). 

:::info

> PocketIC is currently not supported on Windows systems.

Reviewer: This is technically true, but it's very possible to run it via [WSL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/wsl/install) on Windows, which is how any developer on Windows would also run DFX. I think seasoned developers will understand this, but I think less experienced developers may be thrown off by this if it's not mentioned explicitly.

:::

Once the binary file is downloaded, unzip the file and make it executable:

```
gzip -d pocket-ic.gz
chmod +x pocket-ic
```

> :::info

Reviewer: I believe this `:::info` section needs a closing tag `:::`

> On MacOS systems, to bypass developer verification from Apple, you may need to run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On macOS systems, to bypass developer verification from Apple, you may need to run:
```

```
xattr -dr com.apple.quarantine pocket-ic
```

The PocketIC binary can be left in your working directory or you can specify the path to the binary by setting the `POCKET_IC_BIN` environmental variable. 

Add PocketIC Rust do your project with the command:

```
cargo add pocket-ic
```

PocketIC can be imported into your project with the code:

```rust

> pocket_ic::PocketIc

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
use pocket_ic::PocketIc;
```

> pocket_ic::PocketIc

Reviewer: ```suggestion
use pocket_ic::PocketIc
```

```

Then, in your code you can create a new PocketIC instance with the code:

```rust

> let pic = PocketIc::new()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
let pic = PocketIc::new();
```

    assert_eq!(reply, WasmResult::Reply(vec![0, 0, 0, 1]));
 }

fn call_counter_canister(pic: &PocketIc, canister_id: CanisterId, method: &str) -> WasmResult {
    pic.update_call(canister_id, Principal::anonymous(), method, encode_one(()).unwrap())
        .expect("Failed to call counter canister")
}
```

### Example: Multi-subnet testing

Versions of PocketIC `v2.0.0` and newer support multi-subnet testing. Multi-subnet testing allows for simulating multiple, different types of subnets locally. For example, to create an IC instance with an NNS subnet and two application subnets, use the code:

```rust
let pic = PocketIcBuilder::new()
    .with_nns_subnet()
    .with_application_subnet()
    .with_application_subnet()
    .build();
```

Then, to target the NNS subnet to create a canister, use the code:

```rust
let nns_sub = pic.topology().get_nns_subnet().unwrap();
let nns_can_id = pic.create_canister_on_subnet(..., nns_sub);
```

To test one of the application subnets and install a canister, use the code:

```rust
let app_sub_2 = pic.topology().get_app_subnets()[1];
let app_can_id = pic.create_canister_on_subnet(..., app_sub_2);

> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pic.install_canister(app_can_id, ...);
```
```

To create a canister with a specific `canister_id` on a named subnet, in this example the NNS subnet, use the code:

```rust
let ledger_canister_id = Principal::from_text("ryjl3-tyaaa-aaaaa-aaaba-cai").unwrap();

> pic.create_canister_with_id(..., ledger_canister_id);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
pic.create_canister_with_id(..., ledger_canister_id).unwrap();
```

pic.install_canister(ledger_canister_id, ...);
```

Possible types of subnets include:

- Generic system subnets.

- Generic application subnets.

> - Named subnets with `canister_id` ranges, such as the NNS, SNS, II, Bitcoin, and Fiduciary subnets. Named subnets can only be targeted by `install_canister_with_id()`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Named subnets with canister ID ranges like on mainnet, such as the NNS, SNS, II, Bitcoin, and Fiduciary subnets.
```

> For a larger, more complex example that uses cross canister calls on two different subnets, see the full code [here](https://github.com/dfinity/ic/blob/HEAD/packages/pocket-ic/tests/tests.rs#L19).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For a larger, more complex example that uses cross canister calls on two different subnets, see the full code [here](https://github.com/dfinity/ic/blob/HEAD/packages/pocket-ic/tests/tests.rs#L57).
```

## PocketIC Python

To use PocketIC, the latest PocketIC server binary must be downloaded from the PocketIC repo. You can download the latest version for MacOS or Linux systems [here](https://github.com/dfinity/pocketic#download-the-pocketic-server). 

:::info

> PocketIC is currently not supported on Windows systems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PocketIC is currently not supported natively on Windows systems.
```

:::

Once the binary file is downloaded, unzip the file and make it executable:

```
gzip -d pocket-ic.gz
chmod +x pocket-ic
```

:::info

> On MacOS systems, to bypass developer verification from Apple, you may need to run:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On macOS systems, to bypass developer verification from Apple, you may need to run:
```

```
xattr -dr com.apple.quarantine pocket-ic
```

The PocketIC binary can be left in your working directory or you can specify the path to the binary by setting the `POCKET_IC_BIN` environmental variable. 

> Then, run the following command to install PocketIC in your Python virtual environment:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, run the following command to install PocketIC:
```

```
pip3 install pocket-ic
```

To import PocketIC into your Python code, use the line:

```python
from pocket_ic import PocketIC
```

### Example: create a canister with cycles

```python
from pocket_ic import PocketIC

pic = PocketIC()
canister_id = pic.create_canister()
pic.add_cycles(canister_id, 2_000_000_000_000)
```

### Make canister calls

```python
response = pic.update_call(canister_id, method="greeting", ...)
assert(response == 'Hello, PocketIC!')
```

### Make a call directly with a canister object

```python
my_canister = pic.create_and_install_canister_with_candid(...)
```

### Call your canister methods using the native Python syntax

```python
response = my_canister.greeting()
assert(response == 'Hello, PocketIC!')
```

### Example: Single canister testing on a single subnet

The following is a simple, but complete testing example with a counter canister:

```python
import sys
import os
import unittest
import ic

> 
> # The example needs to have the module in its sys path, so we traverse
> # up until we find the pocket_ic package.
> script_dir = os.path.dirname(os.path.abspath(__file__))
> sys.path.append(os.path.dirname(os.path.dirname(script_dir)))
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

        pic = PocketIC()
        canister_id = pic.create_canister()
        pic.add_cycles(canister_id, 1_000_000_000_000_000_000)

        with open(os.path.join(script_dir, "counter.wasm"), "rb") as wasm_file:
            wasm_module = wasm_file.read()
        pic.install_code(canister_id, bytes(wasm_module), [])

        self.assertEqual(
            pic.update_call(canister_id, "read", ic.encode([])),
            [0, 0, 0, 0],
        )
        self.assertEqual(
            pic.update_call(canister_id, "write", ic.encode([])),
            [1, 0, 0, 0],
        )
        self.assertEqual(
            pic.update_call(canister_id, "write", ic.encode([])),
            [2, 0, 0, 0],
        )
        self.assertEqual(
            pic.update_call(canister_id, "read", ic.encode([])),
            [2, 0, 0, 0],
        )

if __name__ == "__main__":
    unittest.main()
```

To see more examples and run them locally, clone the [PocketIC Python repo](https://github.com/dfinity/pocketic-py/tree/main), then run the following command, replacing the example name with the example you'd like to run. For example, to run the `counter_canister` example, use the command:

```

> run python3 examples/counter_canister/counter_canister_test.py

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
python3 examples/counter_canister/counter_canister_test.py
```

```

## Resources

> 

Reviewer: I think it'd be great to mention the main PocketIC repo as the first resource here: https://github.com/dfinity/pocketic

- [PocketIC forum post.](https://forum.dfinity.org/t/pocketic-fast-and-versatile-canister-testing-in-rust-and-python/23793)

> - [PocketIC v20.0.0 release forum post.](https://forum.dfinity.org/t/pocketic-multi-subnet-canister-testing/24901)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PocketIC v2.0.0 release forum post.](https://forum.dfinity.org/t/pocketic-multi-subnet-canister-testing/24901)
```
A glimpse into the future? ;)

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Pic JS.](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@hadronous/pic)

```

> - [PocketIC Python repo.](https://github.com/dfinity/pocketic-py/tree/main)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PocketIC Python.](https://pypi.org/project/pocket-ic/)
```

> - [PocketIC Rust repo.](https://github.com/dfinity/ic/tree/fcb42ce1d36de46e079dfb8d4b68f34cd4f60f13/packages/pocket-ic)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [PocketIC Rust.](https://crates.io/crates/pocket-ic)
```
